.\" Manpage for duck, the Rubber Duck companion CLI.
.\" Regenerate/review alongside cmd/duck; install with `make install`.
.TH DUCK 1 "2026-07-17" "duck" "Rubber Duck Manual"
.SH NAME
duck \- local companion CLI for Rubber Duck courses
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B duck
.I command
.RI [ arguments ]
.br
.B duck help
.RI [ command ]
.br
.B duck
.I command
.B \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B duck
is the local command\-line tool for Rubber Duck courses
.RB ( https://duckgc.com ).
It serves two audiences from one binary.
.PP
.B Learners
pull a course's coding challenges to their machine, run the tests with their
own toolchain, and submit graded solutions.
.B Educators
(authors) pull a course's markdown, edit it locally, validate it, and submit
it as a proposal for community review \(en the whole course is a single
markdown document, and a change publishes once it collects enough approvals
(or one admin approval).
.PP
Run
.B duck
with no arguments, or
.BR "duck help" ,
to list every command. Any command invoked without a required argument prints
its own detailed help.
.SS Concepts
.TP
.B Course and variant
A course has a slug such as
.BR intro\-to\-go .
Each course has one variant per language. A variant is addressed as
.IR course / language ,
for example
.BR intro\-to\-go/go .
Supported languages are
.BR go ,
.BR python ,
and
.BR c .
.TP
.B Challenge
A single graded exercise within a course, addressed by its slug (e.g.
.BR hello\-world ).
.TP
.B Token
Your API credential.
.B duck auth login
mints and saves one; commands that write to the server
.RB ( submit ", " propose ", " proposals )
require it.
.B duck auth status
shows which token would be sent and whether the server accepts it.
.TP
.B Local\-first grading
.B duck submit
runs the tests on your machine and records the verdict immediately. The server
re\-grades in the background as an audit you do not wait on.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI "duck pull " "course/language"
Scaffold a course variant into
.IR ./course\-language/ ,
one subdirectory per challenge holding the starter code and its test file
(plus a
.I go.mod
for Go). A
.I .duck\-course.json
is written at the root so
.B duck test
and
.B duck submit
work from anywhere in the tree. Challenges that already exist locally are
skipped, so pulling again never clobbers work in progress.
.TP
.BI "duck test " [ challenge\-slug ]
Run a challenge's tests locally with the native toolchain \(en no Docker, no
network. Run from inside a pulled course tree. With no slug it runs every
challenge; with a slug it runs just that one. Each run is bounded by a 30\ s
timeout and reports
.BR PASS ,
.BR FAIL ,
or
.BR TIMEOUT .
.TP
.BI "duck submit " challenge\-slug
Grade a solution and record the score. Runs the tests locally, submits the
code together with the claimed verdict, and prints the result immediately; the
server audits in the background. Requires a token. If the language's toolchain
is not installed, submit falls back to synchronous server grading.
.TP
.BI "duck propose " [ file ]
Lint a course markdown file locally, then submit it as a proposal for review.
The course and language come from the document's frontmatter, so this works
for edits and brand\-new courses alike. Re\-running propose on the same file
updates your open proposal (resetting its approvals). Accepts
.BI \-\-title " T"
and
.BI \-\-summary " S"
to describe the change for reviewers. Requires a token.
.TP
.B "duck proposals"
List your proposals \(en id, status, approvals so far, and whether one needs a
rebase because the course changed underneath it.
.B duck proposals status
.I id
shows one proposal. Reviewing and approving happen on the website's
/proposals pages.
.TP
.B "duck auth login"
Prompt for credentials, mint an API token, and save it to
.I ~/.config/duck/token
(mode 0600). Used by
.B submit
and the
.B educator
commands. Alternatively set
.BR DUCK_TOKEN ,
which takes precedence over the saved file whenever it is set.
.RB ( "duck login"
is a deprecated alias.)
.TP
.B "duck auth status"
Report which token duck would send \(en
.B DUCK_TOKEN
wins over
.I ~/.config/duck/token
when both are set \(en and whether the server accepts it. Exits non\-zero if
not. Run this first when a command answers \(lqunauthorized\(rq right after a
login: the usual causes (a stale
.B DUCK_TOKEN
shadowing a freshly saved token file, or a token minted on a different
server) are all visible here.
.TP
.B "duck version"
Print the CLI version.
.TP
.BI "duck help " [ command ]
With no argument, list every command. With a command name, print its detailed
help \(en the same as
.BR "duck " command " \-\-help" .
Supports subcommands, e.g.
.BR "duck help educator pull" .
.SS Educator subcommands
.B duck educator
(alias
.BR "duck ed" )
fetches and validates a course variant's markdown. Submitting changes is
.BR "duck propose" ;
the old
.B educator push
(which published directly, without review) is retired.
.TP
.BI "duck educator pull " "course/language"
Fetch the variant's markdown to
.I ./course\-language.md
and write a
.I <file>.meta.json
sidecar recording the server URL, course, language, and version. To protect
unpushed work, pull refuses to overwrite a local file whose contents differ
from the server's unless
.B \-\-force
is given.
.TP
.BI "duck educator lint " [ file ]
Validate a course markdown file locally, running the same checks the server
would with no network round trip, and print any problems with line numbers.
With no file argument it acts on the single sidecar\-tracked file in the
current directory.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-base " URL"
Server base URL. Defaults to
.BR $DUCK_BASE_URL ,
else
.BR https://duckgc.com .
Accepted by
.BR pull ,
.BR propose ,
.BR proposals ,
.BR "auth login" ,
.BR "auth status" ,
and
.BR "educator pull" .
.TP
.B \-\-remote
.RB ( submit )
Skip the local test run; grade on the server and wait for the result.
.TP
.B \-\-force
.RB ( "educator pull" )
Overwrite a local file that differs from the server's copy.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help for the command and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Learner workflow: pull, edit, test, submit
Pull a course variant into a local directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ duck pull intro-to-go/go
pulled intro-to-go-go/hello-world (10 pts)
pulled intro-to-go-go/fizzbuzz (20 pts)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Edit
.I solution.go
in a challenge directory, then run its tests with your own toolchain:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ cd intro-to-go-go
$ duck test hello-world
=== hello-world: PASS ===
.fi
.RE
.PP
Omit the slug to run every challenge. When the tests pass, submit for a score:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ duck submit hello-world
submission: https://duckgc.com/submissions/1234
passed \(en +10 pts (server audit runs in the background)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Force the authoritative server verdict instead of grading locally:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ duck submit hello-world --remote
.fi
.RE
.SS Educator workflow: pull, edit, lint, propose
Fetch a variant's markdown plus its sidecar:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ duck educator pull intro-to-go/go
pulled intro-to-go-go.md (version 7)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Edit the markdown, validate it offline, then submit it for review:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ duck ed lint
intro-to-go-go.md: no problems found
$ duck propose --summary "clarify the goroutines lesson"
proposed intro-to-go/go as proposal #12
review it at https://duckgc.com/proposals/12
.fi
.RE
.PP
Track its reviews (it publishes at the approval threshold, or on one admin
approval):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ duck proposals
#12   open      intro-to-go/go  "Update intro-to-go/go"  2 approval(s)
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DUCK_BASE_URL
Default server base URL for
.BR pull ,
.BR auth ,
and
.B educator
commands. A
.B \-\-base
flag overrides it.
.TP
.B DUCK_TOKEN
API token; takes precedence over
.IR ~/.config/duck/token .
Ideal for CI.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/duck/token
Saved API token (mode 0600), written by
.BR "duck auth login" .
Ignored whenever
.B DUCK_TOKEN
is set.
.TP
.I <course>-<language>/.duck-course.json
Written by
.BR "duck pull" ;
lets
.B test
and
.B submit
find the server, course, and language.
.TP
.I <course>-<language>.md
The course source, written by
.BR "duck educator pull" .
.TP
.I <file>.md.meta.json
Sidecar recording server URL, course, language, version, and the open
proposal id for
.BR "duck propose" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
A command failed (network error, failing tests, server rejection).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error: an unknown command, or a required argument was missing. The
relevant help is printed.
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation and course sources live in the Rubber Duck repository.
The web application is at
.BR https://duckgc.com .
.SH AUTHORS
The Rubber Duck project.
